rv32i/spec.adoc, before:

= Specification

This part summarises the specification for the design, including the instructions that needs supporting, the CSR registers, and the interrupts/exceptions. Throughout the specification, the RISC-V specification is referenced in the following format:

* `v1_c9` means RISC-V volume 1 (unprivileged ISA), chapter 9
* `v1_t9.1` means RISC-V volume 1 (unprivileged ISA), table 9.1
* `v2_s2.3` means RISC-V volume 2 (privileged architecture), section 2.3

All references to volume 1 refer to version 20191213 (document `riscv-spec-20191213.pdf`), and references to volume 2 refer to version 20211203 (document `riscv-privileged-20211203.pdf`). Both documents are available from the https://riscv.org/technical/specifications/[official specification page].

Other non-ISA specifications are also used. References to the Platform-Level Interrupt Controller (PLIC) Specification refer to version 1.0.0, 3/2023 (document `riscv-plic-1.0.0.pdf`, available https://wiki.riscv.org/display/HOME/RISC-V+Technical+Specifications[here]). References use a format like:

* `plic_f1` means RISC-V PLIC specification, figure 1

== CPU State

The registers required by the RISC-V implementation are summarised in this section. The register file contains 32 registers which are each 32 bits wide, called `x0`-`x31`. The first register `x0` is writable, but always returns zero when read. The program counter is 32 bits wide, and is initialised to the reset vector.

=== Control and Status Registers

A certain minimal set of control and status registers (CSRs) are required by the RISC-V privileged specification. Each is listed in the format "`CSR-address CSR-name`: description" below.

The following informational registers are required to be present, but can be read-only zero:

* `0xf11 mvendorid`: read-only; returns 0 to indicate not implemented.
* `0xf12 marchid`: read-only; returns 0 to indicate not implemented.
* `0xf13 mimpid`: read-only; returns 0 to indicate not implemented.
* `0xf14 mhartid`: read-only; single hart system, returns 0 to indicate hart 0.
* `0xf15 mconfigptr`: read-only zero, configuration platform-specification defined
* `0x301 misa`: read/write; single legal value 0 always returned (WARL), meaning architecture is determined by non-standard means (it is rv32im_zicsr implementing M-mode only).

The status of the CPU is stored in the following status registers:

* `0x300 mstatus`: read/write, containing both WPRI and WARL fields. The bit fields which are non-zero are as follows (assumes only M-mode):
** bit 3: MIE (interrupt enable), read/write
** bit 7: MPIE (previous value of interrupt enable), read/write (?)
** bits [12:11]: MPP (previous privilege mode), WARL always 0b11 (?)
  
* `0x310 mstatush`: read/write, upper 32-bit of status; all fields are read-only zero (only little-endian memory is supported).
  
In addition to the global bit in the status register, interrupts are controlled and monitored by these registers:

* `0x304 mie`: read/write interrupt-enable register. To enable an interrupt in M-mode, both mstatus.MIE and the bit in mie must be set. Bits corresponding to interrupts that cannot occur must be read-only zero.
* `0x344 mip`: 32-bit read/write interrupt-pending register. Since all fields are read-only, writes to this CSR are no-op. The following bits are defined:
** bit 3: machine software interrupt pending (read-only)
** bit 7: machine timer interrupt pending (read-only)
** bit 11: machine-level external interrupt pending (read-only)

When a trap occurs (either due to an interrupt or a exception), the following registers determine where control flow is transferred to and where it returns to after the trap:

* `0x305 mtvec`: read-only, trap handler vector table base address
** bits [1:0]: 1 (vectored mode)
** bits [31:2]: trap vector table base address (4-byte aligned)
* `0x341 mepc`: 32-bit, read/write register, stores the return-address from trap handler. WARL, valid values are allowed physical addresses (4-byte aligned and fit within physical memory address width).

Information about the trap is obtained from these registers:

* `0x342 mcause`: 32-bit, read/write, stores exception code and bit indicating whether trap is interrupt. Exception code is WLRL.
* `0x343 mtval`: read-only zero

In addition, software may use this register in any way while processing traps:

* `0x340 mscratch`: 32-bit read/write register for use by trap handlers

The following privileged-mode registers hold performance monitoring information:

* `0xb00 mcycle`: low 32 bits of read/write 64-bit register incrementing at a constant rate
* `0xb80 mcycleh`: high 32 bits of read/write, 64-bit register containing number of clock cycles executed by the processor.
* `0xb02 minstret`: low 32 bits of read/write, 64-bit register containing number of instructions retired by the processor.
* `0xb82 minstreth`: high 64 bits of read/write, 64-bit register containing number of instructions retired by the processor.

These registers are also accessible via the following shadows (intended for use by unprivileged mode; however, there is only M-mode here, so there is no distinction between privilege levels):

* `0bc00 cycle`: read-only shadow of mcycle
* `0xc80 cycleh`: read-only shadow of mcycleh
* `0xc02 instret`: read-only shadow of minstret
* `0xc82 instreth`: read-only shadow of minstreth

The 64-bit `mtime` register is memory-mapped (it is not a CSR); however, it does have a read-only shadow as a CSR:

* `0xc01 time`: read-only shadow of lower 32 bits of memory mapped 64-bit mtime
* `0xc81 timeh`: read-only shadow of upper 32 bits of memory mapped 64-bit mtime

Finally, the following required performance monitoring counters are all implemented as read-only zero

* `(0xb00 + n) mhpmcountern`: read-only zero (`n` ranges from 3 to 32)
* `(0xb80 + n) mhpmcounternh`: read-only zero (`n` ranges from 3 to 32)
* `(0x320 + n) mhpmevent`: read-only zero (`n` ranges from 3 to 32)
* `(0xc00 + n) hpmcountern`:  read-only zero (`n` ranges from 3 to 32)
* `(0xc80 + n) hpmcounternh`: read-only zero (`n` ranges from 3 to 32)

== Traps

The standard privileged architecture requires support for exceptions and interrupts.

* At the start of each instruction cycle, a trap is triggered transferring control to an interrupt vector, if both (`v2_s3.1.9`):
** Interrupts are globally enabled (`MIE` bit set in `mstatus`)
** An interrupt enable bit (`mie`) and corresponding interrupt pending bit (`mip`) are both set
* While an instruction is in execution, if it raises an exception, a trap is triggered transferring control to the exception vector.

The process of triggering a trap takes one cycle, and is the same for both an exception and an interrupt:

* The `mepc` CSR is set to the current program counter (instruction interrupted or raising the exception) (`v2_s3.1.14`)
* The program counter is set to a trap vector. For exceptions, this is the `base` address in `mtvec` (`v2_s3.1.7`). For interrupts, it is `base + 4*cause`, where `cause` is from the exception code column in `v2_t3.6`. (This design uses vectored interrupts.)
* The `mcause` CSR is set to the exception code in `v2_t3.6`. The interrupt bit is set for an interrupt (`v2_s3.1.15`).
* The `MIE` bit in `mstatus` is copied to `MPIE`, and the `MIE` bit is set to 0 (`v2_s3.1.6.1`)

=== Interrupts

The basic interrupt mechanism follows the Core Local Interruptor (CLINT) specification, based on SiFive chips. The CLINT memory map begins at address `0x1000_0000`. The meaning of the memory-mapped I/O registers in this region are as follows:

* `msip`: write 1 to this bit to request a software interrupt, and write 0 to clear it. The value of this bit is reflected in the read-only `MSIP` field of the `mip` CSR. The register is initialised to zero.
* `mtimecmp`: this is the 64-bit timer compare register as described in the RISC-V privileged ISA specification. A timer interrupt becomes pending exactly when `mtime >= mtimecmp`. It is initialised to zero.
* `mtime`: this is the 64-bit real time register, which increments at a constant rate with wall clock time. It is initialised to zero.

The external interrupt bit `meip` in `mip` (the interrupt-pending register) comes directly from an external interrupt controller which follows the PLIC specification (`plic_f1`). There is only a single hart in this system, which only implements M-mode, therefore there is only one signal line from the PLIC to the hart (the M-mode external interrupt signal; see `plic_s1.3`).

=== Exceptions

When an instruction is executed, it may synchronously raise an exception (meaning the exception is associated with the instruction being executed, and raising the exception will deterministically trigger a trap on the next instruction). The following subset of exceptions defined in `v2_t3.6` is implemented in the design:

.Supported exceptions
[#exceptions, cols="1,1,1"]
|===
| Exception code | Exception | Caused by

| 0 | Instruction address misaligned | Program counter not four-byte-aligned on an unconditional jump or branch taken (`v2_s2.2`). Exception is raised on the jump/branch instruction itself.
| 1 | Instruction access fault | Program counter does not fall within the instruction memory address region. Exception raised on the instruction with invalid program counter.
| 2 | Illegal instruction | The fetched instruction is not supported by this implementation (i.e. is not RV32I, Zicsr, `mret` or `wfi`).
| 3 | Breakpoint | The `ebreak` instruction was executed
| 5 | Load access fault | a load instruction was executed with an address which is not in main memory or an I/O region 
| 7 | Store access fault | a store instruction was executed with an address which is not in main memory or an I/O region, or the address is read-only
| 11 | (M-mode) Environment call | The `ecall` instruction was executed
|===

In this implementation, load/store instructions do not have alignment requirements, so the load/store address misaligned exceptions are not required.


== Memory Map

The memory map for the physical address space is as follows (all addresses are in hexadecimal):

.Memory regions
[#mem-regions, cols="1,1,1,1,1"]
|===
| Memory Region   | Address range         | Size                 | Physical Memory Attributes | Notes

| Instruction ROM | 0000_0000 - 1000_0000 | 1024                 | Instruction fetch only     |
| I/O             | 1000_0000 - 2000_0000 | Sum of special register sizes   | Read/write (load/store)    | See <<special-io-regs>> below
| Main Memory     | 2000_0000 - 2000_0400 | 1024                 | Read/write (load/store)    | 
|===

The addresses in the I/O region are vacant by default (load/store accesses generate an illegal instruction exception). The accessible addresses are given below:

.Special registers in I/O memory
[#special-io-regs, cols="1,1,1,1"]
|===
| Address    | Register name             | Register size | Attributes

| 1000_0000    | msip                      | 4           | Read/write, but only bit 0 is modified     
| 1000_4000    | mtimecmp                  | 8           | Read/write (`v2_s3.2.1`)                     
| 1000_bff8    | mtime                     | 8           | Read/write (`v2_s3.2.1`)                  
|===

Certain addresses in the instruction memory region have the following defined purposes:

.Special vectors in instruction memory
[#special-instr-vectors, cols="1,1,1"]
|===
| Start Address | Memory-mapped Register    | Size

| 0000_0000    | Reset vector (initial PC) | 4                                  
| 0000_0004    | NMI vector                | 4                                  
| 0000_0008    | Exception vector (mtvec)  | 4                                  
| 0000_0014    | Software interrupt vector | 4                                  
| 0000_0024    | Timer interrupt vector    | 4                                  
| 0000_0034    | External interrupt vector | 4                                  
|===

== Instructions

The required instructions are the 32-bit RV32I base integer ISA, the Zicsr extension for CSR manipulation, and the privileged-architecture instructions `mret` and `wfi`. Each category of instructions is defined below

=== Privileged Instructions

The following instructions are required for code executing in machine mode (the only privilege level in this design) (`v2_s3.3`): `ecall`, `ebreak`, `mret`, and `wfi`.

The `ecall` and `ebreak` instructions are required by the unprivileged specification RV32I (`v1_s2.8`). Since the unprivileged instructions are also executing in M-mode in this design, these `ecall` and `ebreak` instructions do the same thing as the M-mode versions.

The instructions `ecall` and `ebreak` raise the exceptions shown in <<exceptions>>, and take no further action.

The instruction `mret` is executed by software to return from a trap. It performs the following steps:

* Copies the `MPIE` bit to `MIE` in `mstatus`
* Sets the `MPIE` to 1
* Sets the program counter to `mepc` (`v2_s3.3.2`)

The `wfi` is implemented as a NOP (`v2_s3.3.3`)

=== Upper Immediate (RV32I)

=== Register-Register (RV32I)

=== Register-Immediate (RV32I)

=== Unconditional Jump (RV32I)

=== Conditional Branch (RV32I)

=== Load (RV32I)

=== Store (RV32I)

=== Control and Status Register (Zicsr)

The unprivileged specification (`v1_ch9`) defines the behaviour of the instructions which manipulate CSRs, in the Zicsr ISA extension. The behaviour of the instructions is as follows:

* `csrrw`: read the addressed CSR into destination register `rd`, and then write the source register `rs1` to the addressed CSR.
* `csrrwi`: read the addressed CSR into destination register `rd`, and then zero extend the immediate `uimm` and write it to the addressed CSR.
* `csrrs`: read the addressed CSR into destination register `rd`. Then, only if the source register `rs1` is not `x0`, bitwise-OR the current value of the CSR with `rs1`, and write the result back to the CSR (i.e. set bits in the CSR where there is a 1 in `rs1`).
* `csrrsi`: read the addressed CSR into destination register `rd`. Then, only if the immediate `uimm` is not `0`, bitwise-OR the current value of the CSR with `uimm` (zero-extended to 32 bits), and write the result back to the CSR (i.e. set bits in the CSR where there is a 1 in `uimm`).
* `csrrc`: read the addressed CSR into destination register `rd`. Then, only if the source register `rs1` is not `x0`, bitwise-AND the current value of the CSR with !`rs1`, and write the result back to the CSR (i.e. clear bits in the CSR where there is a 1 in `rs1`).
* `csrrci`: read the addressed CSR into destination register `rd`. Then, only if the immediate `uimm` is not `0`, bitwise-AND the current value of the CSR with `!uimm` (zero-extended to 32 bits _after_ negation), and write the result back to the CSR (i.e. clear bits in the CSR where there is a 1 in `uimm`).

Any instructions that write to a CSR:

* will raise an illegal instruction exception if the CSR is read-only. In this case, the state of registers will be as if the instruction did not occur.
* will not change the value of an CSR bits that are read-only in otherwise writable registers
* for WLRL fields in writable CSRs, any value that is written (even an invalid one) will be written anyway, without any checking in hardware.
* for WARL fields in writable CSRs, any attempt to write an invalid value will cause no change in the CSR field (the old value will be retained).
* the write will displace any other automatic modification of the CSR by hardware; for example, writing to `instret` will stop auto-increment of `instret` on that instruction (`v1_s9.1`). This is also interpreted as applying to all counters, including `mcycle`, etc.)

Instructions that read CSRs read the value of the CSR as it was just prior to instruction execution (e.g. the value of `instret` is taken before incrementing in due to the read instruction itself).

Instructions that attempt to perform an operation on a non-existent CSR raise an illegal instruction exception.

==== Notes on behaviour

* The instructions are defined (`v1_s9.1`) to atomically read and write CSRs. Since there is only one hart in this design, this required is satisfied by a single read/write operation.
* The `csrrw` and `csrrwi` instructions are defined (`v1_t9.1`) to omit the CSR read if the destination register `rd` is `x0`, and not trigger any side effects that would occur on a read. In this design, no CSR has a side effect that occurs on a read, so for simplicity the `*rw*` instructions can perform a read irrespective of `rd`, and attempt the write to `rd` (which will have no effect if `rd` is `x0`).
* In this design, all CSRs are 32-bits wide, so there is no need to zero-extend them before writing to registers.
* In this design, writing invalid values to WLRL fields does not raise an illegal instruction exception (`v2_s2.3`).

Commit message:

Started working on specification of each instruction

rv32i/spec.adoc, after:

= Specification

This part summarises the specification for the design, including the instructions that needs supporting, the CSR registers, and the interrupts/exceptions. Throughout the specification, the RISC-V specification is referenced in the following format:

* `v1_c9` means RISC-V volume 1 (unprivileged ISA), chapter 9
* `v1_t9.1` means RISC-V volume 1 (unprivileged ISA), table 9.1
* `v2_s2.3` means RISC-V volume 2 (privileged architecture), section 2.3

All references to volume 1 refer to version 20191213 (document `riscv-spec-20191213.pdf`), and references to volume 2 refer to version 20211203 (document `riscv-privileged-20211203.pdf`). Both documents are available from the https://riscv.org/technical/specifications/[official specification page].

Other non-ISA specifications are also used. References to the Platform-Level Interrupt Controller (PLIC) Specification refer to version 1.0.0, 3/2023 (document `riscv-plic-1.0.0.pdf`, available https://wiki.riscv.org/display/HOME/RISC-V+Technical+Specifications[here]). References use a format like:

* `plic_f1` means RISC-V PLIC specification, figure 1

== CPU State

The registers required by the RISC-V implementation are summarised in this section. The register file contains 32 registers which are each 32 bits wide, called `x0`-`x31`. The first register `x0` is writable, but always returns zero when read. The program counter is 32 bits wide, and is initialised to the reset vector.

=== Control and Status Registers

A certain minimal set of control and status registers (CSRs) are required by the RISC-V privileged specification. Each is listed in the format "`CSR-address CSR-name`: description" below.

The following informational registers are required to be present, but can be read-only zero:

* `0xf11 mvendorid`: read-only; returns 0 to indicate not implemented.
* `0xf12 marchid`: read-only; returns 0 to indicate not implemented.
* `0xf13 mimpid`: read-only; returns 0 to indicate not implemented.
* `0xf14 mhartid`: read-only; single hart system, returns 0 to indicate hart 0.
* `0xf15 mconfigptr`: read-only zero, configuration platform-specification defined
* `0x301 misa`: read/write; single legal value 0 always returned (WARL), meaning architecture is determined by non-standard means (it is rv32im_zicsr implementing M-mode only).

The status of the CPU is stored in the following status registers:

* `0x300 mstatus`: read/write, containing both WPRI and WARL fields. The bit fields which are non-zero are as follows (assumes only M-mode):
** bit 3: MIE (interrupt enable), read/write
** bit 7: MPIE (previous value of interrupt enable), read/write (?)
** bits [12:11]: MPP (previous privilege mode), WARL always 0b11 (?)
  
* `0x310 mstatush`: read/write, upper 32-bit of status; all fields are read-only zero (only little-endian memory is supported).
  
In addition to the global bit in the status register, interrupts are controlled and monitored by these registers:

* `0x304 mie`: read/write interrupt-enable register. To enable an interrupt in M-mode, both mstatus.MIE and the bit in mie must be set. Bits corresponding to interrupts that cannot occur must be read-only zero.
* `0x344 mip`: 32-bit read/write interrupt-pending register. Since all fields are read-only, writes to this CSR are no-op. The following bits are defined:
** bit 3: machine software interrupt pending (read-only)
** bit 7: machine timer interrupt pending (read-only)
** bit 11: machine-level external interrupt pending (read-only)

When a trap occurs (either due to an interrupt or a exception), the following registers determine where control flow is transferred to and where it returns to after the trap:

* `0x305 mtvec`: read-only, trap handler vector table base address
** bits [1:0]: 1 (vectored mode)
** bits [31:2]: trap vector table base address (4-byte aligned)
* `0x341 mepc`: 32-bit, read/write register, stores the return-address from trap handler. WARL, valid values are allowed physical addresses (4-byte aligned and fit within physical memory address width).

Information about the trap is obtained from these registers:

* `0x342 mcause`: 32-bit, read/write, stores exception code and bit indicating whether trap is interrupt. Exception code is WLRL.
* `0x343 mtval`: read-only zero

In addition, software may use this register in any way while processing traps:

* `0x340 mscratch`: 32-bit read/write register for use by trap handlers

The following privileged-mode registers hold performance monitoring information:

* `0xb00 mcycle`: low 32 bits of read/write 64-bit register incrementing at a constant rate
* `0xb80 mcycleh`: high 32 bits of read/write, 64-bit register containing number of clock cycles executed by the processor.
* `0xb02 minstret`: low 32 bits of read/write, 64-bit register containing number of instructions retired by the processor.
* `0xb82 minstreth`: high 64 bits of read/write, 64-bit register containing number of instructions retired by the processor.

These registers are also accessible via the following shadows (intended for use by unprivileged mode; however, there is only M-mode here, so there is no distinction between privilege levels):

* `0bc00 cycle`: read-only shadow of mcycle
* `0xc80 cycleh`: read-only shadow of mcycleh
* `0xc02 instret`: read-only shadow of minstret
* `0xc82 instreth`: read-only shadow of minstreth

The 64-bit `mtime` register is memory-mapped (it is not a CSR); however, it does have a read-only shadow as a CSR:

* `0xc01 time`: read-only shadow of lower 32 bits of memory mapped 64-bit mtime
* `0xc81 timeh`: read-only shadow of upper 32 bits of memory mapped 64-bit mtime

Finally, the following required performance monitoring counters are all implemented as read-only zero

* `(0xb00 + n) mhpmcountern`: read-only zero (`n` ranges from 3 to 32)
* `(0xb80 + n) mhpmcounternh`: read-only zero (`n` ranges from 3 to 32)
* `(0x320 + n) mhpmevent`: read-only zero (`n` ranges from 3 to 32)
* `(0xc00 + n) hpmcountern`:  read-only zero (`n` ranges from 3 to 32)
* `(0xc80 + n) hpmcounternh`: read-only zero (`n` ranges from 3 to 32)

== Traps

The standard privileged architecture requires support for exceptions and interrupts.

* At the start of each instruction cycle, a trap is triggered transferring control to an interrupt vector, if both (`v2_s3.1.9`):
** Interrupts are globally enabled (`MIE` bit set in `mstatus`)
** An interrupt enable bit (`mie`) and corresponding interrupt pending bit (`mip`) are both set
* While an instruction is in execution, if it raises an exception, a trap is triggered transferring control to the exception vector.

The process of triggering a trap takes one cycle, and is the same for both an exception and an interrupt:

* The `mepc` CSR is set to the current program counter (instruction interrupted or raising the exception) (`v2_s3.1.14`)
* The program counter is set to a trap vector. For exceptions, this is the `base` address in `mtvec` (`v2_s3.1.7`). For interrupts, it is `base + 4*cause`, where `cause` is from the exception code column in `v2_t3.6`. (This design uses vectored interrupts.)
* The `mcause` CSR is set to the exception code in `v2_t3.6`. The interrupt bit is set for an interrupt (`v2_s3.1.15`).
* The `MIE` bit in `mstatus` is copied to `MPIE`, and the `MIE` bit is set to 0 (`v2_s3.1.6.1`)

=== Interrupts

The basic interrupt mechanism follows the Core Local Interruptor (CLINT) specification, based on SiFive chips. The CLINT memory map begins at address `0x1000_0000`. The meaning of the memory-mapped I/O registers in this region are as follows:

* `msip`: write 1 to this bit to request a software interrupt, and write 0 to clear it. The value of this bit is reflected in the read-only `MSIP` field of the `mip` CSR. The register is initialised to zero.
* `mtimecmp`: this is the 64-bit timer compare register as described in the RISC-V privileged ISA specification. A timer interrupt becomes pending exactly when `mtime >= mtimecmp`. It is initialised to zero.
* `mtime`: this is the 64-bit real time register, which increments at a constant rate with wall clock time. It is initialised to zero.

The external interrupt bit `meip` in `mip` (the interrupt-pending register) comes directly from an external interrupt controller which follows the PLIC specification (`plic_f1`). There is only a single hart in this system, which only implements M-mode, therefore there is only one signal line from the PLIC to the hart (the M-mode external interrupt signal; see `plic_s1.3`).

=== Exceptions

When an instruction is executed, it may synchronously raise an exception (meaning the exception is associated with the instruction being executed, and raising the exception will deterministically trigger a trap on the next instruction). The following subset of exceptions defined in `v2_t3.6` is implemented in the design:

.Supported exceptions
[#exceptions, cols="1,1,1"]
|===
| Exception code | Exception | Caused by

| 0 | Instruction address misaligned | Program counter not four-byte-aligned on an unconditional jump or branch taken (`v2_s2.2`). Exception is raised on the jump/branch instruction itself.
| 1 | Instruction access fault | Program counter does not fall within the instruction memory address region. Exception raised on the instruction with invalid program counter.
| 2 | Illegal instruction | The fetched instruction is not supported by this implementation (i.e. is not RV32I, Zicsr, `mret` or `wfi`).
| 3 | Breakpoint | The `ebreak` instruction was executed
| 5 | Load access fault | a load instruction was executed with an address which is not in main memory or an I/O region 
| 7 | Store access fault | a store instruction was executed with an address which is not in main memory or an I/O region, or the address is read-only
| 11 | (M-mode) Environment call | The `ecall` instruction was executed
|===

In this implementation, load/store instructions do not have alignment requirements, so the load/store address misaligned exceptions are not required.


== Memory Map

The memory map for the physical address space is as follows (all addresses are in hexadecimal):

.Memory regions
[#mem-regions, cols="1,1,1,1,1"]
|===
| Memory Region   | Address range         | Size                 | Physical Memory Attributes | Notes

| Instruction ROM | 0000_0000 - 1000_0000 | 1024                 | Instruction fetch only     |
| I/O             | 1000_0000 - 2000_0000 | Sum of special register sizes   | Read/write (load/store)    | See <<special-io-regs>> below
| Main Memory     | 2000_0000 - 2000_0400 | 1024                 | Read/write (load/store)    | 
|===

The addresses in the I/O region are vacant by default (load/store accesses generate an illegal instruction exception). The accessible addresses are given below:

.Special registers in I/O memory
[#special-io-regs, cols="1,1,1,1"]
|===
| Address    | Register name             | Register size | Attributes

| 1000_0000    | msip                      | 4           | Read/write, but only bit 0 is modified     
| 1000_4000    | mtimecmp                  | 8           | Read/write (`v2_s3.2.1`)                     
| 1000_bff8    | mtime                     | 8           | Read/write (`v2_s3.2.1`)                  
|===

Certain addresses in the instruction memory region have the following defined purposes:

.Special vectors in instruction memory
[#special-instr-vectors, cols="1,1,1"]
|===
| Start Address | Memory-mapped Register    | Size

| 0000_0000    | Reset vector (initial PC) | 4                                  
| 0000_0004    | NMI vector                | 4                                  
| 0000_0008    | Exception vector (mtvec)  | 4                                  
| 0000_0014    | Software interrupt vector | 4                                  
| 0000_0024    | Timer interrupt vector    | 4                                  
| 0000_0034    | External interrupt vector | 4                                  
|===

== Instructions

The required instructions are the 32-bit RV32I base integer ISA, the Zicsr extension for CSR manipulation, and the privileged-architecture instructions `mret` and `wfi`. Each category of instructions is defined below.

Unless otherwise specified, all programs are assumed to increment the program counter by four bytes.

Many instructions involve building an immediate from instruction fields. The clearest diagram of how to build immediates for most instruction formats is `v1_f2.4`. Most immediates are sign-extended based on bit 31 of the instruction. The CSR instructions are an exception, which use the `rs2` field as an unsigned immediate (not sign extended). Normally, the (resulting 32-bit) immediate is used as an operand to an addition, or is written directly to a register.

=== Privileged Instructions

The following instructions are required for code executing in machine mode (the only privilege level in this design) (`v2_s3.3`): `ecall`, `ebreak`, `mret`, and `wfi`.

The `ecall` and `ebreak` instructions are required by the unprivileged specification RV32I (`v1_s2.8`). Since the unprivileged instructions are also executing in M-mode in this design, these `ecall` and `ebreak` instructions do the same thing as the M-mode versions.

The instructions `ecall` and `ebreak` raise the exceptions shown in <<exceptions>>, and take no further action.

The instruction `mret` is executed by software to return from a trap. It performs the following steps:

* Copies the `MPIE` bit to `MIE` in `mstatus`
* Sets the `MPIE` to 1
* Sets the program counter to `mepc` (`v2_s3.3.2`)

The `wfi` is implemented as a NOP (`v2_s3.3.3`)

=== Upper Immediate (RV32I)

Upper immediate instructions `lui` and `auipc` use an immediate `imm`, where `imm[31:12]` is stored in the U-type instruction, and `imm[11:0]` is 0. Then:

* `lui` stores `imm` in the register `rd`
* `auipc` stores `imm + pc` in the register `rd`

No exceptions are raised.

=== Register-Register (RV32I)

The instructions `add`, `sub`, `sll`, `slt` `sltu`, `xor`, `srl`, `sra`, `or`, and `and`, all execute in the same way:

* Perform an operation between the two registers `rs1` and `rs2`
* Store the result to the register `rd`

No exceptions are raised.

=== Register-Immediate (RV32I)

The instructions `addi`, `slli`, `slti` `sltiu`, `xori`, `srli`, `srai`, `ori`, and `andi`, all execute in the same way:

* Perform an operation between register `rs1` and the sign-extended immediate `{ 20{instr[31]} , instr[31:20] }`
* Store the result to the register `rd`

No exceptions are raised.

=== Unconditional Jump (RV32I)

=== Conditional Branch (RV32I)

=== Load (RV32I)

=== Store (RV32I)

=== Control and Status Register (Zicsr)

The unprivileged specification (`v1_ch9`) defines the behaviour of the instructions which manipulate CSRs, in the Zicsr ISA extension. The behaviour of the instructions is as follows:

* `csrrw`: read the addressed CSR into destination register `rd`, and then write the source register `rs1` to the addressed CSR.
* `csrrwi`: read the addressed CSR into destination register `rd`, and then zero extend the immediate `uimm` and write it to the addressed CSR.
* `csrrs`: read the addressed CSR into destination register `rd`. Then, only if the source register `rs1` is not `x0`, bitwise-OR the current value of the CSR with `rs1`, and write the result back to the CSR (i.e. set bits in the CSR where there is a 1 in `rs1`).
* `csrrsi`: read the addressed CSR into destination register `rd`. Then, only if the immediate `uimm` is not `0`, bitwise-OR the current value of the CSR with `uimm` (zero-extended to 32 bits), and write the result back to the CSR (i.e. set bits in the CSR where there is a 1 in `uimm`).
* `csrrc`: read the addressed CSR into destination register `rd`. Then, only if the source register `rs1` is not `x0`, bitwise-AND the current value of the CSR with !`rs1`, and write the result back to the CSR (i.e. clear bits in the CSR where there is a 1 in `rs1`).
* `csrrci`: read the addressed CSR into destination register `rd`. Then, only if the immediate `uimm` is not `0`, bitwise-AND the current value of the CSR with `!uimm` (zero-extended to 32 bits _after_ negation), and write the result back to the CSR (i.e. clear bits in the CSR where there is a 1 in `uimm`).

Any instructions that write to a CSR:

* will raise an illegal instruction exception if the CSR is read-only. In this case, the state of registers will be as if the instruction did not occur.
* will not change the value of an CSR bits that are read-only in otherwise writable registers
* for WLRL fields in writable CSRs, any value that is written (even an invalid one) will be written anyway, without any checking in hardware.
* for WARL fields in writable CSRs, any attempt to write an invalid value will cause no change in the CSR field (the old value will be retained).
* the write will displace any other automatic modification of the CSR by hardware; for example, writing to `instret` will stop auto-increment of `instret` on that instruction (`v1_s9.1`). This is also interpreted as applying to all counters, including `mcycle`, etc.)

Instructions that read CSRs read the value of the CSR as it was just prior to instruction execution (e.g. the value of `instret` is taken before incrementing in due to the read instruction itself).

Instructions that attempt to perform an operation on a non-existent CSR raise an illegal instruction exception.

==== Notes on behaviour

* The instructions are defined (`v1_s9.1`) to atomically read and write CSRs. Since there is only one hart in this design, this required is satisfied by a single read/write operation.
* The `csrrw` and `csrrwi` instructions are defined (`v1_t9.1`) to omit the CSR read if the destination register `rd` is `x0`, and not trigger any side effects that would occur on a read. In this design, no CSR has a side effect that occurs on a read, so for simplicity the `*rw*` instructions can perform a read irrespective of `rd`, and attempt the write to `rd` (which will have no effect if `rd` is `x0`).
* In this design, all CSRs are 32-bits wide, so there is no need to zero-extend them before writing to registers.
* In this design, writing invalid values to WLRL fields does not raise an illegal instruction exception (`v2_s2.3`).
